---
layout: post
header: A Full Project with Sketch
subtitle: Front-end Dev
navColor: dark
photo: sketch-blog.jpg

---
After dabbling in Sketch for a while, and toying with the idea of using for more than just a mobile mockup or two, I finally bit the bullet and used Sketch for all the interface design on a project. I can totally agree with several others when they say Sketch isn’t a replacement for photoshop so much as it as replacement for the many things you use Photoshop for which it doesn’t excel. Brushes, complicated masks, curves (photo editing features in general) and effects are all omitted.

#### It’s a primitive product (RED)
PS is tested. Years of versions, millions of users, and bazillions of dollars.  It’s easy to take that for granted when we loose 20 minutes of work because of a crash. Bohemian coding has only been working on Sketch for 3 years, and the difference between that, and a product that has been on the market for 25 years is certainly noticeable. It’s pretty remarkable that they’re able to come up with something worth comparing to PS.  That said, it clearly doesn’t have the flavor that a well-seasoned product like Photoshop does, but that’s okay - mostly because it also doesn’t carry the price tag that PS does.

#### It still never crashed on me (GREEN)
PS has a habit of crashing and has reinvoked my former muscle memory for command S I had forgotten long ago. It does a pathetic recovery effort, that I find never works - Despite having around twice as many elements in a given document, Sketch stuttered, but never lost my work.

#### I miss the keyboard shortcuts (RED)
That’s it, I just miss the keyboard shortcuts PS has that Sketch has replaced with a less-cryptic, usable interface.

#### Organization, Clean and easy Organization (GREEN)
To me the most valuable use for sketch is organization. What would have been 10 PS files, 1 Indesign document, and countless inconsistencies was solved with a single Sketch file. I was able to use cascading properties, and design on the fly. What I lost in functionality and learning curve, Sketch made up in time-saving file/style management.

#### Exporting, As it should be (GRAY)
This is a heavily-touted feature in Sketch, that was different, but it really isn’t a make or break for me. It’s nice, convenient, and saved a few minutes here and there, but it isn’t something that I’ve been particularly frustrated at with PS.

#### Will it Blend?
That’s the big question - I’ll certainly use it on the next project, until it can’t do what I need and then I’ll switch to PS. I may learn a few more keyboard shortcuts, and a few more tricks. In the end it saved me time vs costing me it - but that’ll be on a case-by-case basis. I do a good amount of concepting in program (things like “how does this look here”, and “let’s try this”), so it certainly helps with an iterative workflow, that likes to get digital as soon as possible.