---
layout: post
header: Going to Googs
title: Getting Started with ES6
subtitle: My story of getting a job at Google and moving to a city I’d never been. 
tags: [Personal]
photo: post-modernjs.jpg
handle: writing-modern-javascript
navOrientation: top-nav
nav: left-align
colorTheme: light
---

My story of getting a job at Google and moving to a city I’d never been

My past month and a half has been filled with 28 different airplanes, 16 states, 3 countries, over 30 trout, over 3k miles driving. It’s been a pretty exciting stage of life, I couldn’t be more grateful, or feel much luckier. I don’t think of myself as “that guy”. I spend more time asking “what, how do people do that stuff”, than doing stuff like that. But also probably sounds like something “that guy” would say though. At any rate, here’s the story. 

#### From one big G to the next
Around 6 months ago, I made a short list of places that I’d always wanted to live and companies that I’d always wanted to work for. Tops was Google, but it also included places like Netflix, LinkedIn, a startup, etc. Spent a few weekends dusting off my resume, updating my portfolio, etc. I talked with a few connections in places we thought it’d be great to live. After spending some time brushing up my resume/portfolio, I filled out some applications - a few through connections, but mostly ‘cold applications’. This was a pretty casual process - I liked what I was already doing and where I was. 

I was pretty flattered to get callbacks from several places over the course of the next few months - agencies, a few big companies (including Google), and startups - my afternoons were filled with recruiter phone calls, and interviews.

I spent a lot of time preparing and interviewing, and in the process found some potential fits, and some ‘no-fits’. I had to make some hard decisions turning down opportunities, and got turned down on others - something I attribute to God’s divine providence, and timing. 

The entire Google process took over 5 months, and was one of the most extensive and (strangely enough) rewarding interview experiences I’ve ever been a part of. I applied to Google online, without any internal connections, and ended up getting the job. There’s been tons of luck in that, mixed in with a whole bunch of hard work.  

#### A busy month (from ski slopes to Thai street food to Trout waters of Yellowstone)
When I received the job offer from Google, we’d never even been to Seattle. I’m a strong proponent of adventuring when you can. I like what Audrey Sutherland was quoted in `Let My People Go Surfing`, “Don’t spend money on gear, spend it on airplane tickets”.

There might only be a handful of times where the opportunity comes up to take a month or two off and being in-between jobs / moving cities was the perfect excuse. My wife and I took the opportunity to go on a a few adventures that we wouldn’t have been otherwise able to. We already had a busy March planned and April began to fill up fast. 

The weekend after I accepted the job, we flew out to Seattle to see what we had signed up for. 

The following weekend, we had planned a weekend trip out to Denver to see some Senators hockey, and shred some gnar with my sisters. 

In one of my finest flight deals ($450 rt), my sister joined my wife and I on a trip around Thailand, now on of my favorite places. Highlights included elephant TLC in Chiang Mai, private Island life in Phuket, and Shanghai China too. 

It wouldn’t be vacation without some fly fishing. Took an extended weekend trip out to Bennet springs, MO to practice strippin’ trout. 

In our plans, we had a gap week just in case we weren’t able to find a home in Seattle the first trip out, so naturally, we went to Vegas. Vegas can actually be quite cheap if you don’t gamble (tickets were $79 rt, and our hotel/resort was under $65/n). 

We used the whole ‘having to drive halfway across the US to move’ thing into a pretty spectacular road trip vacation. For those interested, our route is below - I would *highly* recommend this trip, the northwestern US has some truly spectacular stuff. And of course - fly fishing.

Finally traveling onward to Oklahoma and Arkansas, seeing some great friends and celebrating weddings. 

I had my first week week of orientation at Google in California two weeks ago - somewhere I never thought I’d be. My wife and I sold a car, got rid of more than half of everything we owned, lived out of a suitcase for 2 months, and along with Lucy move into our 657 Sq ft apartment in Seattle next week. We’re incredibly fortunate, grateful, and excited. 

Don’t worry, my IG will calm down, and I’ll probably return to a lackluster routined life of cynicism in no time, but for now, I feel pretty lucky, grateful and excited.
